---
title: 'Transcribing Russian Cyrillic to IPA'
excerpt: "One of the main obstacles for those who are learning Russian is the need to map the pronunciation of Cyrillic characters to correct phonemes. Converting Russian words into International Phonetic Alphabet may help, but is this task of grapheme-to-phoneme conversion as simple as it seems?"
permalink: /posts/ru-to-ipa/
tags:
  - transcribing
  - grapheme-to-phoneme
---

<div style="text-align: justify;">One of the main obstacles for those who are learning Russian is the need to map the pronunciation of Cyrillic characters to correct phonemes. Converting Russian words into International Phonetic Alphabet may help, but is this task of grapheme-to-phoneme conversion as simple as it seems?</div>

<h2>Okay, it's just a mapping, right? Python dictionary to the rescue!</h2>
<div style="text-align: justify;">Well, not quite. While Russian pronunciation is not as unpredictable as that of English, there are certain rules how some clusters of particular characters must be pronounced. Let's look at some of them:</div>

<ul>
  <li><b>Palatalization</b></li>
    <div style="text-align: justify;">Almost all consonants in Russian have two realizations: palatalized (soft) and non-palatalized (hard). The palatalization of a consonant occurs when it is followed such Russian vowels as <i>я, и, е, ё, ю</i> and the soft sign <i>ь</i>. Exception: there is no palatalization after post-alveolar fricatives (ж - /ʐ/, ш - /ʂ/) and an alveolar affticate (ц - /t͡s/).</div>

<br>

  <li><b>Devoicing of the final obstruent</b></li>
    <div style="text-align: justify;">An obstruent is a speech sound produced by pushing the airflow over some obstruction. The majority of Russian obstruents are classified in pairs as 'voiced' and 'voiceless', e.g. <i>г-к, в-ф, б-п</i>. When a voiced obstruent occurs in the final position, it is replaced by its voiceless counterpart (devoiced).</div>
    <p>
    Examples: хле<b>б</b> — [xlje<b>p</b>].

<br>

  <li><b>Regressive assimilation</b></li>
    <div style="text-align: justify;">In Russian, the voiceness of a consonant often depends on that of the following consonant. In other words, Russian demonstrates a case of regressive assimilation of such a quality as voiceness. For example, a voiced sound is replaced by its voiceless counterpart if the next sound is also voiceless: гря<b>дк</b>а (garden bed) — [grja<b>tk</b>a]. An opposite situation — a voiceless sound assimilates to the following voiced one: во<b>кз</b>ал (train station) — [vo<b>gz</b>al].</div>

<br>

  <li><b>Unpredictable pronunciation of certain words</b></li>
    <div style="text-align: justify;">There are some words which pronunciation do not conform to any rules and exceptions and thus must be memorized.</div>
    <p>
    Examples: бо<b>г</b> (god) — [bo<b>x</b>], бу<b>хг</b>алтер (accountant) — [bu<b>g</b>alter], пожал<b>уй</b>ста (please) — [poʐal<b>u</b>sta], <b>ч</b>то (what) — [<b>ʂ</b>to].

</ul>

<h2>Transcribe Russian to IPA automatically</h2>

<div style="text-align: justify;">Here is a tool that can automatically translate Russian texts to International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA). <b>NB:</b> this tool is a side project that I work on in my spare time. It's still under development and may lack some of the planned functionalities.</div>
<p>

<iframe src="https://ru-transcribe.herokuapp.com/" height="900" width="1500" frameBorder="0"></iframe>
